This is John Kohler with growingyourgreens.com.
Today we have another irrigation episode.
I seem to get many questions on irrigation.
I covered some irrigation stuff in my other
two shows, one about converting a standard
faucet spigot or hose bib to basically using
an inline timer using a battery.
Then I had another episode regarding using
your basically lawn sprinkler time to use
for drip irrigation and that's what I'm doing
here in the front yard.
I didn't get into the third part that I never
had actually edited and put up.
I actually had some good new information that
I'm going to share with you today and show
you actually work in progress that we're doing
to finish the irrigation here.
So basically the front yard we have the timer
on the wall over there.
It's basically the standard sprinkler irrigation
timer.
We basically converted over, instead of this
coming up with the sprinklers now we unscrewed
the sprinklers and basically converted it
over the PVC pipe.
We come up in each bed with a PVC tube.
So it's basically, it comes out of the ground
as 3/4 inch.
We then did then adapt it to a half inch because
a half inch ball values are much less expensive
than the 3/4 inch ball values and then we're
going into basically a half inch drip pipe
anyways, so we got to convert it over to half
inch at some point anyways.
So we come out, this is the 3/4 pipe.
We convert it over into half inch, we go into
a ball value, this allows us to control the
flow of water.
So this does restrict the flow, so you could
put the pressure really high to spray a lot
of water or a little bit or cut it off if
we don't want it being watered.
In this case it has been cut off because this
was a new bed, it was getting rained on for
the watering in the winter time, but now we're
into spring it's raining less and we're going
to replant this bed.
This is what's left of the bok choy bed and
we've been harvesting those.
I had a nice bok choy salad last night with
orange nut dressing and that was quite delicious.
So this is how it comes out and we're going
to show you once it comes out of this, basically
these are half inch fittings, a half inch
ball value, it'll only go into a half inch
T and then we basically go into these half,
these inserts that basically convert the PVC
over to accept the drip hose tubing.
So that's this bed here, lets go to the next
bed here where we're actually installing the
drip tubing and we'll show you more about
that.
Now we're going to install out of the upright
here, we're going to install the drip hosing.
So it's very easy.
What we do is we basically take the drip tube
here and then when we convert it and we go
down to the soil level, this is an extra step.
You could probably save about, I don't know,
a dollar fifty, about two dollars in parts
if you didn't want to go back down to the
soil level.
You can just run the hose out and it'll be
high for a little while and then go down.
But to be flexible and have the optimal use
of the space and like if it went down we would
just come straight out and then we wouldn't
be able to adjust our row.
But with this, we could put this and adjust
a row in the soil.
So if we put this in here our row could be
over here, or we could move our row over to
this side.
So basically it's really easy, just want to
take this drip hose and we have a little section
of drip hose about that long.
We're just going to put it in here like this
and wiggle it back and forth until it's tight.
That's how easy it is to put the drip hose
in there into the quick-fit connectors.
So now our drip system is all set up in this
bed.
So now we've laid out all the drip pipe in
this small bed.
We basically have three rows, so we're running
the drip pipe in three rows that are going
to correspond with where we're going to plant.
This is the last connection we have to do,
at each, every corner we have these joints.
You just basically push the hose into the
joint, basically you just take it like this
and just literally just push them in.
You got to kind of wiggle back and forth as
you're pushing the hose in.
It'll just kind of get inserted and it's just
basically just pressed to fit, that's how
tight it works.
The other thing I highly recommend is you
get some stakes, so if you could use some
old wire, but they make these galvanized stakes
here to secure your hose because this hose
does come in a spool.
When it does come in a spool it gets basically
contorted to the shape of the spool.
I recommend when you dry your drip hose definitely
buy the longer spool and check the cost per
foot.
Sometimes it's cheaper to by the five hundred
foot spool but sometimes it's cheaper to buy
two, four hundred foot spools depending on
the price.
So you're going to use a lot of it, you could
calculate in each bed, some of the fifteen
foot beds I have up to six lines going up
and down that bed.
So definitely buy a lot of drip tube.
It's relatively inexpensive.
A hundred feet runs about ten bucks but then
if you go up to five hundred feet I think
it's around forty buck or so.
Or I think my friend got recently two hundred
feet for about twelve to fifteen dollars.
So buy a lot, you're going to need it.
I think I bought, this roll was a thousand
feet actually.
So now we're going to talk about the different
sizes of drip tubing.
The two standard sizes of drip tubing are
basically .700 OD or outside diameter and
.0620 OD or outside diameter.
Each drip tubing is a little bit different
size.
So if this is the .700 OD and that's known
as the 5/8ths and this is the .6200 known
as a half inch.
They're not interchangeable.
So they're two different, completely different
sizes and you can tell by the fittings on
here, the end fittings on the half inch are
.620 is green on the ends, and then the .700
is black on the end.
So I think we had it one time where we had
most of my stuff was made with the half inch
OD and then I started buying the 5/8ths inch
OD and then it wouldn't be compatible.
So you can get connectors that have a .620
or half inch OD and then a .700 or 5/8ths
inch OD to basically join between the two
different sized connectors.
In a pinch I have actually taken the 5/8 inch
and pinched it down and really shoved it into
the .620 but I don't recommend doing that.
Get the right connectors.
Overall I would recommend getting the .700
OD, all things remaining equal, that's going
to flow a little bit more water, but get water
you have available.
Why do I use drip irrigation?
Well drip irrigation, probably the number
one reason why I use drip irrigation is because
I love to travel so much.
When you travel or when you have a busy job
or when you're away from your home and you
forget to water at night because you're too
tired after you get home from work or actually
you're not even at home, the drip irrigation
is all on a timer, it's going to water basically
whenever you want it to water and you don't
have to water.
So it takes a lot of the labor out of watering
your plants.
I have friends that come out, come home from
work every day and they water their plants.
But they could, if they had a drip system
installed they would not have to worry about
that task and they could have basically a
drip timer and a system do that and take care
of all that for them.
So save them time and they could go on and
do other things.
The other reason for a drip system is because
specifically is because it waters at the base
of the plant.
Instead of overhead watering, which may people
have overhead watering, that wastes water,
it waters a whole area which not only waters
the plant, not only gets the leaves wet, but
it also waters all the ground around the plant,
which may basically, you're watering the weeds
or the seeds that may come up between the
plants.
So also watering each plant could deter weeds,
which guess what, in the long run it's also
going save you labor because now you're not,
you may not pulling weeds because you're only
watering at the plant.
So I'm going to get back to work.
This is John Koher with growingyourgreens.com.
Keep on irrigating!
It'll save you time and money in the long
run.